Um, it's March the 14th, 1984. My name is Bree Dodd,
and I'm in the office of Walter Johnson. Jackson.
Jackson. Always do that. And we're here to discuss
the history of planning in Galveston. The current
history of planning in Galveston. Well, current
history. I don't know very little. I'm not sure
Galveston did a very good job of planning in some
cases, especially in the last 20 years. But, uh,
uh, Gal, I just can't speak to the historical
development of planning. I do know that from in the
earlier, the formation years of Galveston, there
certainly had to be a lot of planning, had to be a lot
of studies and ways to create and make a city on a
barrier island functional and they were
successful for quite a while and especially
following such things as the 1900 storm where
6,000 lives were lost and the whole city had to be
the grade level raised and the the development of
city government, which came about in Galveston,
as we know, or the manager council form of
government. Today, Galveston seems to be doing a
fairly good job of trying to study some of its
needs, but it still appears that most of it is
reaction to things that are happening instead of
long-range planning or, you know, not... I think
our problem is, lately, we may have... failed to
plan instead of planning to fail, but we failed
anyway, especially in the 60s and 70s. But it's
coming back now where folks are really taking a
look at long-range plans as well as short-range
plans.
We have problems of water down here. Where are we
going to get our water supply? That's been served
well with contracts. Bind water from Houston for
the next 30 years. lousy job of planning how we're
going to keep our streets and sewers and upgrade
our city services in conjunction with the tax
limitations that have been imposed by the voters
of Galveston. And we're really facing a strong
dilemma, a big dilemma in that area right now. And I
don't know what's going to happen, but we better
get some good planners that can figure out
something to do and sell it to the people.
I think planning is planning certainly has to be
addressed in the future, and they're looking at it
to some extent now, but as it has to do with being on a
barrier island and the shift of the vegetation
lines, development up and down the seawall, or all
development on this island, and
what problems we do face. And that probably has not
been adequately done either, but You know, it's
some of that's going to have to be done and will in
the future. Let's look at your list here. See what
else we do. I don't know. There is a comprehensive
plan. They have a lot of that systematic stuff.
They'll have to tell you at City Hall about that.
Transportation is a tremendous problem here. We
sure need to plan better for evacuation from
hurricanes and storms. We only have one real good
exit off this island, which is the Galveston
Causeway and Interstate 45 and Hurricane Allen
showed us what a mess that is when you're trying to
evacuate. So that's certainly a problem.
How the influences affect affected planning in
our community? Well, I think probably all these
categories have had some effect politically.
Galveston is a very political town and things seem
to wind up in issues and fighting things out on the
ballot instead of doing a good job of studying the
problems and working them out. Our geographic
location, as we've talked about, certainly has a
big role in that. I really don't think religious or
ethnic have affected us too much except to the fact
that We have probably had a lack of planning and
good management in the city because we lack a
strong middle class in this community. We have a
majority of lower income people and quite a few
higher income people, but most of the middle class
people tend to migrate towards the mainland,
Dickinson, Clear Lake area. Even though they work
here, they drive home at night. across the
causeway and really have not gotten into the
political arena and pressed for some of the
changes that I think fast growing suburban areas
tend to do because it's
probably geographic and it's sociological and
it's probably educational. We tend to have a high
college professor tight mentality coming from
the medical branch, which would tend to be more
environmentalist and tend to lean to one
direction. And we have a strong blue collar
background here, but just which they tend to
accept things as they are and don't tend to really
care about changing too much or studying it. We
have studied problems. As long as the federal
government gives us money to study problems,
we'll find 10 or 15 people that want to go out and get
some of that money to study it, but those studies
tend to wind up on the shelf somewhere and never
really get implemented. some of the things that I
think we really need to be planning for in the
future as far as long range and the development of
Galveston certainly is transportation as we were
talking about not only access into the island but
once people get here how are we going to move them we
are finally in an upward mobility type situation
as far as population and we're gonna we've got new
people moving here, as well as a tremendous
increase in tourist and visitor traffic, and
that's going to require some tremendous planning
in how to handle this in future years. As I
mentioned, the water problem seems to be planned
pretty well. City utilities, city services
certainly is a weak area, and you've got to plan for
the dollars as well as plan where you're going to
put things and how you're going to do it. That seems
to be a weak area we need to get into. We've touched
on the economic through all of this. Military,
we're not significantly impact by the military.
However, we are significantly impact by
governmental agencies and governmental
services, which have created a lower tax base
because we have so much tax exempt property that
are do not go into the do not generate taxes. And
it's it's it's put us in a money crunch from that
angle as well as the tax limitations.
I promise you all these things in here have can be
addressed for galveston though starting with the
spanish era all the way up it'd be interesting to
see what you come up with because especially from
the civil war the republic of texas own and even the
mexican era but all of those really it would be fun
to go back and see how it how it affects i just don't
know but uh... uh... i imagine a lot of the things
that started in in planning of cities especially
in the state of texas probably started right here
in galveston if you can go find where to get it out,
because nearly everything that happened started
in Galveston. So if you can get some good research
material or get hold of somebody that knows, I'll
tell you a good interview would be Bob Nesbitt.
He's a historian here. Do you know Bob? No. Robert
Nesbitt? Let me write his name down, because Bob
probably could tell you all of this. He worked with
Ray Miller. Do you know who Ray Miller is? I don't
know. The Eyes of Texas and does, you know, all of
that. But he... He would be a tremendous, and he's a
nice fella, and he would take the time to really sit
down and give you a good chronological
development and everything, and he would know it
and have support material for it too. Oh, well,
fantastic. Let me see if I can get his phone number
for you. Oh, that would be even better.
I know the problems. I just don't know what's
always being done. We do things like planning for,
you know, working with the school, working with
the city on immediate things like bond issues and
streets and roads and the water problems. But the
overall part, which I think really will tie into
this later, and you'll see why we have such a
problem now, somebody like Bob could really do you
a good job. Why don't we take this from a different
angle, how the planning has affected the
businesses in Galveston? Well, the lack of
planning probably has had a tremendous effect on
them simply from
what to do with downtown, you know. Downtowns have
had trouble before and they've got central
business districts all over tend to be having
troubles and The lack of doing good planning and
finding out the pitfalls and having a few
failures, such as our Central Mall area and
everything, it has had some effect on us. On the
other hand, you can say that planning from the
development of historical restoration and from
those ends are having tremendous gains for us and
probably are going to be the lifeblood of the
redevelopment of the Central Business District.
The ability to come out with some ordinances and
some
whatever from city hall that allows for zoning. It
allows for the development or the restoration of
the historical areas, the strand area, and pretty
much the city as a whole since we have so much
historical significance. One other question,
Dallas. I
think we've touched on most of it. I think so, too.
Like I say, I'm just not familiar enough to really
get into the nuts and bolts of it. But boy, Bob, Bob.
And tell him who you are, because he'd love to help
you. He is a super nice guy, and he would be a super
source. And what he doesn't know, he certainly
would know where to refer you. I know to refer you to
City Hall or people like that, or people that may
give you an opinion one way or the other, but really
good factual information. other than Rosenberg
Library or somebody like Bob that knows the city.
Well, I think you've given me some very good
information. Well, hopefully it'll help you
some. Oh, yes, I'm sure it will. Thank you very
much. Thank you. You driving back and forth, or
y'all?
My
name is Bree Dodd, and I'm in the office of Roger
Hedrick.
And it's March the 17th, 16th, 1984.
Okay, and we're here to discuss the history of
planning in Galveston.
Okay, question one. When was the first
legislative authorization of a comprehensive
plan in Galveston?
As far as I know, the first authorization came
about when the current city charter was adopted in
1961.
A major part of that city charter revolved around
the new form of government. You may recall that
back in 1900, after the 1900 hurricane or major
storm, the city of Galveston invented a new form of
government called the commission form of
government. That form of government was in effect
until 1961, when by a vote of the people, the city
charter was adopted and the city manager form of
government was instituted. That was also the time
where there was something in the city charter
called Article 10, which dealt specifically with
planning. That's when A planning commission was
formed prior to that time. As I understand it, it
was primarily a zoning commission. The powers and
duties of the planning commission were set out,
including recommendations to city council, the
annual submission of a capital improvements
budget, the final authority for disapproval and
approval of subdivision flats, and, of course,
the authority to prepare a master plan or a
comprehensive plan. Another feature of this
charter, as long as I'm on it, was that it set forth
the creation of a position called the director of
planning. So this is called for in the charter
itself that the director is appointed by the city
manager, and he's got to have certain, well, let me
quote, who shall be qualified by special training
and experience in the field of city planning. And
then it goes into what are some of the components of
the master plan or comprehensive plan and what the
legal effect of the master plan. So it was really
first authorized, as far as I know, in 1961. As far
as when a plan was approved,
components components of a comprehensive plan
were passed.
Starting in 1963, a
report on population land use thoroughfares and
transportation was prepared by urban planning
and area development consultants. That was June
of 63. Also in 63, a public utilities plan was
prepared by Forrest and Cotton.
In July of 65, the Galveston Central Business
District plan was reported, pardon me, report was
prepared by Marvin Springer and Associates.
Also in 1965, a housing community facilities plan
report was prepared by Marvin Springer. In 65,
also, people and land use thoroughfares business
district beachfront housing and community
facilities plan was again done by Marvin Springer
and Associates.
Then we jump to some period in time when the plan, I
guess you would say, was largely modified or a new
plan appeared in 1973 by Marvin Springer and
Associates to be adopted by council then the
following year in 74. Now I would like to point out
that because the city of Galveston only basically
went to the end of the seawall, the western part of
Galveston was not included in that plan. So to this
day we don't really have a comprehensive plan in
existence for the west end of Galveston Island.
Also, at least to how I define a plan, many things
were missing besides simply the rest of the
island. There weren't really a lot of clear-cut
goals and objectives and policies. A year later,
let's see if it was a year later,
pardon me, it was even in 1976, which might have
been a year or two later, that an independent,
really non-official city-sponsored group got
together and did a goals for Galveston plan, which
really kind of, I guess, complemented the
comprehensive plan, although normally goals
come before a comprehensive plan. So things were
done a little bit differently then. And
Since that time,
well, we do not have any systematic periodic
review of our city's comprehensive plan.
However, the planning staff sees the island
largely as two different areas. The older, more
urbanized part of the island, which is that 10
miles behind the seawall, and those remaining 20
miles of the island which are largely
resort-oriented or second homes, that there is a
large amount of land available that can be planned
for on the west end of the island. But as far as the
east end, that is mainly it doesn't have growth,
but it has redevelopment potential. And so our
basic process to bring about land use planning to
Galveston has kind of two concepts. The first one
is we got started in going through the older part of
Galveston on a neighborhood by neighborhood
basis. And to date, we have two neighborhood plans
which have been adopted by the Planning
Commission and City Council. Which
neighborhoods are those? That's the East End and
Old Central. We have two neighborhood plans in
process which are nearly completed. And those...
Those are Carver Park and the Kempner Park
neighborhoods. Beyond those four, there still
are a good six to eight plans which no funding has
been identified yet or a way of undertaking those
plans. Although I would like to point out that in
1982, the city council did officially recognize
geographically about a dozen neighborhoods
within the city. And we established a priority
system for going through the older parts of the
city and doing it on a neighborhood by
neighborhood planning basis. But again, we have
not identified funds at this time to continue that
program beyond this year. We had funded those
plans through community development block grant
program, but those funds have been diminishing
and council's priorities have been changing.
Lastly, I would comment that we have a proposal
which has gained acceptance by the Planning
Commission and City Council to do a comprehensive
plan this year for Galveston Island. I can give you
a copy of that if you'd like that. Oh, fantastic.
Can I bring it back for you right now so I don't
forget about it? Catherine.
Okay. Would you also bring another copy of one of
these things, please? You want a copy of that?
Yeah. They're back there with Catherine. Okay.
This
is a staff proposal, which basically proposes to
do a comprehensive plan for the entire city of
Galveston, which would be all of Galveston Island
and all of Pelican Island. Galveston really is two
islands. And there's basically two land holes in
Galveston. It excludes an area called Pirates
Beach, Pirates Cove, which is a separate
municipal utilities district, which is
unincorporated. It's a part of the county. And
also Bermuda Beach, which is a separate city unto
itself on West Galveston.
Yeah, I think we've answered. Two, three, let's
see, four.
Yeah, I would say we do an awful lot of incremental
planning. But again, with those two concepts of
trying to do the old parts of town through
neighborhood planning and This proposal that the
staff has put together would basically rely on
existing plans in the older part of town and try and
weave them together. In the western part of
Galveston, it really is very much different. It's
very ecologically sensitive, so we
anticipate using what we call coastal zone
management principles, which are more
applicable to barrier islands in that particular
part of town. Boy, when was the first one? Isn't
that basically from Clark's book on coastal zone
management and finding what tidal areas are, et
cetera? I would say I have
read Clark's book, and I would say that, I guess,
has been kind of the Bible, so to speak. And
although we have reviewed other barrier island
plans and incorporated the ideas there, notably
Sanibel Island off of Florida.
Have they been very successful and that's why
you're basing some of your principles on that
plan?
I don't know how successful the plan is, but the
techniques of planning appear to be very
successful and appear to be state of the art. And
certainly because of the individuals involved in
the preparation of that plan, I have a great deal of
confidence in the methodology. That was Wallace
McHarg, Robertson Todd out of Philadelphia. The
Conservation Fund
was involved in addition to, I think, a lot of local
participation.
When was the first zoning ordinance? I would have
to talk to the city...
Can I have one of the ladies call down? Sir. Okay.
I'll call down myself.
Oh. By the way, I'd like the Xerox to cover so I have
the bibliographical information. Okay. This is
Roger. Can you tell me when the first zoning
ordinance was adopted by, I guess, a city council?
1937 was the very first one. Very fine. Thank you.
Bye-bye. 1937. So this is another city where
zoning came before comprehensive planning.
Well, yeah, and of course, you know, all that does
is follow the federal state way of doing things,
too, because, you know, the federal legislation,
you know, And of course, in the state of Texas,
while we have zoning enabling legislation, we do
not have planning enabling legislation yet.
Although, I've recently received a proposal from
Richard Lilly,
who is basically a head of legislative affairs for
Texas chapter APA, and he's proposed a two-part
program for drafting new legislation this year.
The first part was to basically survey planning
directors and executive board members on what the
issues were that should be studied and
recommendations then brought to the Texas
Municipal League. And secondly, the drafting of
enabling legislation on comprehensive
planning. So I guess that's really a side issue,
but it fits in.
Okay, number seven is what procedures do we have
for implementing community plans? Okay, let me
see if I can remember my, the
state legislation.
Well, the tools available for all cities in Texas,
The tools available for Galveston also to carry
out the plan involve grants of authority from the
state and consist of four powers. Regulatory,
eminent domain, taxation, and the spending
power.
As far as planning and the planning department,
we've only been involved in two of those powers.
The first one, of course, is regulatory. We're
involved on a regular basis through zoning and
subdivision regulations. And then the spending
power, we are involved through our capital
improvements plan and program. So that is that.
What CIP are you currently working on? Well,
actually, I think our CIP has been rather
successful as of late. Of course, I too say success
of a plan is only if a plan is implemented. And in
this case,
council named something they called the
Executive Bond Committee, which comprised of
members largely of the Planning Commission, in
addition to a bond expert and a member of the
Chamber of Commerce, and put together a bond
proposal. And city council is now on record of
taking this to the voters on August of this year,
August of 84.
What is very unusual, I guess, about this is that
the last time, there's two things, really.
Galveston hasn't had a bond issue that I'm aware
of, a general
bond issue, since about 1964 was the last time. So
it's been about 20 years or two decades. The other
major issue involved, which is to why I think...
this is a particularly unique planning program,
is that there occurred a charter amendment
which limited to increases in city budget to no
more than 7% a year, which on the current
situation, there is no way to pass a bond issue and
then pay the bonds back through general revenue
sources. So on this same August election date,
they will also have to place on there, if they want
to proceed in a timely fashion, an amendment to the
charter to take the budget limitations of general
obligation bonds from under this budget lid,
which was placed there by the taxpayers. So this is
a two-fold situation.
When did the city first establish a planning
department?
Let me call the city secretary. She's been around
for quite a while.
Linda, this is Roger. I've got a tough question for
you. When did the city establish the first
planning department?
You say why? You
don't know? Okay, can you bounce that off of Patsy
and see if she knows? Thank you.
Concerning professional planners on the staff,
we have two planners in addition to myself, the
director, who are what I would consider
professional planners. We're anticipating
hiring one more planner. So it would be a staff of
three planners and one director. We also have a
compliance officer, zoning compliance officer,
who is not trained in planning, but obviously he is
enforcing the zoning codes.
While we're waiting, I see that you have a
background in landscape architecture. I think
that's sort of interesting. Because I'm a
landscape architect. Oh, is that right? Well,
I'm highly biased, but I certainly think that's
probably one of the better backgrounds for
physical city planning. Well, I agree. And you'll
note I don't have a degree in city planning. Public
administration. Right, right. Which to me,
planning kind of wedges itself in between public
administration and landscape is a little more
nitty gritty site planning type of stuff. And
public administration tends to be even broader.
Yes. And perhaps even more policy oriented.
Certainly. Yeah, this is Roger. Can you tell me
when the first planning department was formed?
OK.
OK, prior to that date, then, the Planning
Commission just did all the work. And they only did
zoning up until that point. OK, but you must have
had zoning cases then. And only, OK, and you didn't
have a staff for that commission, in other words.
Very good.
OK. OK. There was a zoning commission until 1961.
Then it became a?
Oh. OK. Was it since 37 that there was a separate
zoning and planning?
37. OK. See,
at one time, there were two separate commissions,
which is not unusual. There's a zoning commission
and a planning commission.
And Patsy's trying to recall the city secretary
exactly when all this came about. But there was not
a planning staff per se until 1961 when the city
charter was adopted. Was there a director at that
time? Or did they just hire out consultants? She
said planning department. Because I got the
impression that Marvin Springer and Associates
was a consultant. Well, yeah. But that would
probably be likely. It's easy to rationalize that
if they hired one guy, and he's it. Of course. OK.
Let
me just repeat this for someone else's benefit.
August the 5th, 1937,
zoning regulations were established.
The zoning commission was established in a later
year or two.
Okay.
Was there a separate planning commission? Oh,
okay. Okay, so a separate planning commission was
formed in 61. In 1973, they combined the planning
and the zoning commission into one, and that's the
way it's been ever since. Very good. Thanks for
your help. That is interesting. I hope you send me a
copy of what you're doing, because I'm not going to
remember all this stuff. I can send you a
transcript and then the final article. OK, that
would be great.
Number 10 is really easier to show you a picture
than it is to describe it.
Would you like a copy of this? Yes. That would be
good. OK. Rather than describe it, can I just refer
to it? Sure. OK. Question number 10 refers to the
organizational structure and its relationship
with the legislative body and citizens groups.
Rather than try and totally describe it, I'll just
say that we have a city manager form of government.
The planning department supports four different
boards, those boards being the City Planning
Commission, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
Historical District Board, and a new committee
which was just formed called,
if we haven't met yet, the Hazardous Materials
Technical Advisory, or pardon me, Ad Hoc Advisory
Committee. From time to time, City Council has
also formed various committees which we have
supported. There has been a Record Service Code
Committee, because we also administer the record
code for the city. There's a hazardous materials
committee, which is different than the one I just
named because we prepared a hazardous materials
transportation and storage plan for the city. And
also the executive bond committee is another
committee which we have supported.
That's pretty much it. OK, let me get this off of
this. Oh, and the bibliographic. Oh, okay. You
just want the front page? Yes.
Oh, boy. Founding of a city. Was it planned? How did
this event play a role in your city's planning
history?
Okay.
I can't think of the guy's name right now, but when I
get that book back... The town was laid out by a
gentleman in a grid fashion. And so that
definitely played a major role.
Frontier functions.
Well, Galveston Island was originally
inhabited, as I understand it, during the cooler
months, at least, by Indians. It was also provided
a harbor. It's a natural deep harbor for pirates.
Probably, the railroad did not have Well, it had an
impact, but obviously the port facilities played
a much larger role as far as transportation goes.
There was an air base here that goes back to World
War II.
I'm a little foggy on some of the history of all
that. But you still see remnants of that when you go
down to the hotel under construction and you see
the bunker, which is the new hotel that's being
built around. You go down and see the San Luis Pass,
oh, somewhere on the 40-hundred block on Seawall
Boulevard. That's a gun emplacement, you know,
thick concrete kind of thing.
Urban renewal was totally rejected by the
citizens of Galveston. It's something they did
not want.
Luckily. Concerning the freeways, obviously,
Galveston's connection to the mainland is pretty
tenuous. We have one primary access point, and
that's Interstate 45 across the causeway.
a ferry boat, which can take you to Port Bolivar and
on up to Beaumont and other places east on to
Louisiana. And to the west, there is also a bridge
which hooks up to the Freeport and the other chain
of islands down to the south and west going on down.
And of course, there is the airport. And, of
course, there is the Houston Ship Channel. So
those are pretty much the modes of
transportation, although we are connected by a
separate railroad bridge also. Of course, there
is no passenger service at this time, but there has
been continual discussion, at least since I've
been here, I've been here for four years now, about
re-establishing some type of passenger service
to the mainland. The old railroad station has been
part of it has been converted to a railroad museum.
And so that might be the obvious point to depart
from again.
Significant public development projects. Oh,
yes. There was one that is much larger than all the
rest combined, and that is the seawall itself,
which was the result of the 1900 storm in which
6,000 people were killed. Work started one or two
years after that traumatic event, and today we
have a seawall which is some 17 feet in height, made
of concrete,
with rubble at the base these days because of
erosion, and a four to six lane road on top with
sidewalks called Seawall Boulevard. I think I
mentioned it's 10 miles in length. So that was the
major public works project.
I think we've talked about the city's chartering
changes, and it had a great deal of impact on
planning.
They can fire me, and they can reduce my salary, but
they can't eliminate the position unless there's
a vote of the people.
Consultants definitely have played a role in city
planning here, as
they often do. I
think in the early years, because of a lack of
expertise back in the 60s, city planning was
really just starting to come of age
with the help of 701 planning funds. And cities
just didn't have the expertise on board. So I think
most of the comprehensive planning direction
came from consultants. I think that's different
from today, where you can see it's the staff which
has prepared the comprehensive plan proposal,
although we do not have the staff on board in
sufficient quantity to carry it out, as is
indicated there. And so we propose basically a
one-third, two-thirds mix as far as man hours
involved. but where the staff would give guidance
to the plan and obviously the planning commission
would oversee it and the council would approve a
plan eventually.
The current status of planning in the city remains
political. You know, it's up and down. Although I
think it continues to gain support when you can see
that planners are here to stay and I think
people... and that they have everyone's interest
in mind. And when you have a staff that manages to
stay for a few years and become more a part of the
community.
How have the following influences affected
planning in your community?
Here's this.
OK. There
have been strong political influence in this
community, largely, I think, going back to the
turn of the century and when Galveston was kind of
what was known at that time as the Wall Street of the
Southwest, an extremely wealthy town. And since
that time, Two, three, or four, maybe slightly
more.